# Priority Queues

**Input Description**: A set of records with totally ordered keys.

**Problem Description:** Build and maintain a data structure for providing quick access to the *smallest* or *largest* keys

.

**Discussion:**

- what other operations do you need? — min-max only? search by key? deleting arbitrary key?
- do you know the maximum data structure size in advance?
- might you raise or lower the priority of elements already in the queue?
    - this requires that we are able to retrieve elements from the queue based on their key

**Implementation Choices:**

- **Sorted array or list**
    - easy to identify the smallest element and remove it by decreasing index
    - insertion is slow as total order has to be maintained
    - suitable when no insertions into the queue
- **Binary Heaps**
    - maintain implicit binary tree structure in an array
    - support extract-min and insertion in $O(lg\;n)$
    - best when we know upper bounds. to mitigate this we can use dynamic arrays
- **Bounded-height priority queue**
    - *constant* time insertion and find-min operations whenever the range of possible keys is limited
    - if $keys \in [1,n]$, set up an array of n linked lists, maintain top pointer. for insert key k, add to Kth bucket, set top = min(top, k).
- **Binary search trees**
    - effective as left most leaf is always smallest and rightmost one the largest
    - most appropriate when you also need other dictionary operations or if key range is unbounded
- **Fibonacci and priority heaps**
    - designed to speed up decrease-key operations
    - arises in shortest path computations when we discover a shorter route to a vertex v than previously established.
    - better performance on very large computations
    

**C++ Implementations:**

```cpp
//priority queue in c++ stl is implemented as heap data structure

priority_queue<int> max_pq; //max-heap by default

max_pq.push(10);
max_pq.push(5);
max_pq.push(20);

max_pq.size(); // 3
max_pq.empty(); //false
max_pq.top(); // 20
max_pq.pop(); // removes 20

//for min-heap
priority_queue<int, vector<int>, greater<int>> min_pq;
min_pq.top(); // 5

// custom pq
class Person{
	public:
		int age;
		float height;
		Person(int age, float height):age(age) height(height){}
}

bool operator<(const Person& p1, const Person& p2)
{
	return p1.height < p2.height; //max-pq
}

priority_queue<Person> pq;

```